{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset1 Cambria Math;}{\f2\fnil\fcharset0 Cambria Math;}}
{\colortbl ;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}{\*\mmathPr\mmathFont1\mwrapIndent1440 }\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs22\lang9\par
\par
\highlight1\fs32 1. What are the key differences between Procedural Programming and ObjectOrientedProgramming (OOP)?\par
\par
\highlight0\fs22 | Procedural Programming             | Object-Oriented Programming           |\par
| ---------------------------------- | ------------------------------------- |\par
| Based on procedures/functions      | Based on objects/classes              |\par
| Uses top-down design               | Uses bottom-up design                 |\par
| Data and functions are separate    | Data and functions are combined       |\par
| Less secure                        | More secure due to data hiding        |\par
| Difficult to manage large programs | Easier to manage large programs       |\par
| No inheritance or polymorphism     | Supports inheritance and polymorphism |\par
| Focuses on algorithm/process       | Focuses on real-world objects         |\par
Theoretical Difference Between Procedural Programming and OOP\par
Procedural Programming\par
Procedural Programming is a programming paradigm based on the concept of procedures or functions.\par
The program is divided into small functions, and these functions operate on data.\par
\par
It follows a top-down approach.\par
\par
Importance is given to functions and sequence of actions.\par
\par
Data is generally shared among functions.\par
\par
Suitable for small and medium-sized programs.\par
\par
Object-Oriented Programming (OOP)\par
Object-Oriented Programming is a programming paradigm based on the concept of objects and classes.\par
Objects contain both data and methods that operate on that data.\par
\par
It follows a bottom-up approach.\par
\par
Importance is given to objects and data security.\par
\par
Data is hidden using encapsulation.\par
\par
Suitable for large and complex software systems.\par
\par
Key Theoretical Differences\par
Procedural Programming\tab Object-Oriented Programming\par
Based on procedures/functions\tab Based on objects/classes\par
Uses top-down design\tab Uses bottom-up design\par
Data and functions are separate\tab Data and functions are combined\par
Less secure\tab More secure due to data hiding\par
Difficult to manage large programs\tab Easier to manage large programs\par
No inheritance or polymorphism\tab Supports inheritance and polymorphism\par
Focuses on algorithm/process\tab Focuses on real-world objects\par
Conclusion\par
Procedural Programming focuses on how the task is performed, whereas OOP focuses on objects that perform the task. OOP provides better security, reusability, and scalability compared to procedural programming.\par
\par
\highlight1\fs36 2. List and explain the main advantages of OOP over POP.\par
\par
\highlight0\fs22 Advantages of OOP over POP\par
\par
Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) offers several advantages over Procedural-Oriented Programming (POP):\par
\par
1. Data Security\par
\par
OOP provides encapsulation and data hiding, which protect data from unauthorized access.\par
In POP, data is usually global and less secure.\par
\par
2. Code Reusability\par
\par
OOP supports inheritance, allowing existing classes to be reused in new programs.\par
This reduces duplication of code and saves development time.\par
\par
3. Easy Maintenance\par
\par
Programs in OOP are organized into objects and classes, making large programs easier to manage, debug, and update.\par
\par
4. Modularity\par
\par
Each object works independently, so changes in one part of the program do not greatly affect other parts.\par
\par
5. Real-World Modeling\par
\par
OOP represents real-world entities using objects, making programs more realistic and easier to understand.\par
\par
6. Flexibility through Polymorphism\par
\par
The same function can perform different tasks depending on the object, increasing flexibility in programming.\par
\par
7. Better Scalability\par
\par
OOP is suitable for developing large and complex applications because new features can be added easily.\par
\par
8. Reduced Complexity\par
\par
By using abstraction, OOP hides unnecessary implementation details and shows only essential features.\par
\par
\par
\highlight1\fs32 3.  Steps to Set Up a C++ Development Environment\par
\highlight0\fs22 1. Install a C++ Compiler\par
\par
\par
A compiler converts C++ source code into executable machine code.\par
\par
Common C++ compilers:\par
\par
GCC\par
Clang\par
Microsoft Visual C++\par
2. Install an IDE or Code Editor\par
\par
An IDE (Integrated Development Environment) helps in writing, editing, compiling, and debugging programs.\par
\par
Popular IDEs/editors:\par
\par
Visual Studio Code\par
Code::Blocks\par
Dev-C++\par
Visual Studio\par
3. Configure the Compiler\par
\par
After installation:\par
\par
Set the compiler path if required.\par
Connect the compiler with the IDE/editor.\par
Verify that the compiler is detected properly.\par
4. Write a Simple C++ Program\par
\par
Create a file with the .cpp extension and write a simple program.\par
\par
Example:\par
\par
#include <iostream>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    cout << "Hello World";\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
5. Compile the Program\par
\par
Use the compiler to convert the source code into an executable file.\par
\par
Example command:\par
\par
g++ program.cpp -o program\par
6. Run the Program\par
\par
Execute the compiled file.\par
\par
Example:\par
\par
./program\par
7. Test and Debug\par
\par
Check the output for errors and use debugging tools provided by the IDE/compiler to fix problems.\par
\par
Conclusion\par
\par
Setting up a C++ development environment involves installing a compiler, choosing an IDE/editor, configuring tools, writing code, compiling, and running the program successfully.\par
\par
\highlight1\fs36 4. What are the main input/output operations in C++? Provide examples.\par
\highlight0\fs22 Main Input/Output Operations in C++\par
\par
Input and Output operations in C++ are performed using the iostream library.\par
\par
Input means taking data from the user.\par
Output means displaying data to the screen.\par
\par
The main input/output objects are:\par
\par
cin \f1\u8594?\f0  used for input\par
cout \f1\u8594?\f0  used for output\par
cerr \f1\u8594?\f0  used for displaying errors\par
clog \f1\u8594?\f0  used for logging messages\par
1. Output Operation (cout)\par
\par
cout is used to display output on the screen.\par
\par
Example\par
#include <iostream>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    cout << "Hello World";\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Output\par
Hello World\par
2. Input Operation (cin)\par
\par
cin is used to take input from the user.\par
\par
Example\par
#include <iostream>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    int age;\par
    cin >> age;\par
    cout << "Age is: " << age;\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Input\par
18\par
Output\par
Age is: 18\par
3. Error Output (cerr)\par
\par
cerr is used to display error messages.\par
\par
Example\par
#include <iostream>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    cerr << "Error occurred!";\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
4. Log Output (clog)\par
\par
clog is used for logging information.\par
\par
Example\par
#include <iostream>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    clog << "Program is running";\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Common Operators Used\par
Operator\tab Purpose\par
<<\tab Insertion operator (output)\par
>>\tab Extraction operator (input)\par
\par
\\\\\par
\highlight1\fs36 5.  \f2  \f0 What\f2  \f0 are\f2  \f0 the\f2  \f0 different\f2  \f0 data\f2  \f0 types\f2  \f0 available\f2  \f0 in\f2  \f0 C\f2 ++? \f0 Explain\f2  \f0 with\f2  \f0 examples\f2 .\par
\par
\highlight0\fs22 Data Types in C++\par
\par
A data type specifies the type of data a variable can store, such as integers, decimal numbers, characters, or logical values.\par
\par
C++ provides different types of data types, mainly divided into:\par
\par
Basic (Primitive) Data Types\par
Derived Data Types\par
User-Defined Data Types\par
1. Basic (Primitive) Data Types\par
\par
These are the fundamental data types provided by C++.\par
\par
Data Type\tab Description\tab Example\par
int\tab Stores whole numbers\tab int a = 10;\par
float\tab Stores decimal numbers\tab float b = 5.5;\par
double\tab Stores large decimal values\tab double c = 15.6789;\par
char\tab Stores a single character\tab char d = 'A';\par
bool\tab Stores true or false values\tab bool e = true;\par
void\tab Represents no value\tab void display();\par
Example Program\par
#include <iostream>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    int age = 18;\par
    float marks = 85.5;\par
    char grade = 'A';\par
    bool pass = true;\par
\par
    cout << age << endl;\par
    cout << marks << endl;\par
    cout << grade << endl;\par
    cout << pass << endl;\par
\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
2. Derived Data Types\par
\par
These data types are derived from basic data types.\par
\par
Data Type\tab Description\tab Example\par
Array\tab Collection of same type elements\tab int arr[5];\par
Pointer\tab Stores memory address\tab int *p;\par
Function\tab Set of instructions\tab int add();\par
Reference\tab Alias for another variable\tab int &x = y;\par
Example\par
int arr[3] = \{1, 2, 3\};\par
3. User-Defined Data Types\par
\par
These are created by the programmer.\par
\par
Data Type\tab Description\tab Example\par
struct\tab Groups different data types\tab struct Student\par
class\tab Blueprint for objects\tab class Car\par
union\tab Shares memory among members\tab union Data\par
enum\tab Defines named constants\tab enum Day\par
Example\par
struct Student \{\par
    int id;\par
    char name[20];\par
\};\par
Type Modifiers in C++\par
\par
Modifiers change the size or range of data types.\par
\par
Modifier\tab Example\par
short\tab short int x;\par
long\tab long int y;\par
signed\tab signed int z;\par
unsigned\tab unsigned int a;\par
\par
\highlight1\fs36 6. Explain the difference between implicit and explicit type conversion in C++.\line\par
\highlight0\f0\fs22\lang9 Difference Between Implicit and Explicit Type Conversion in C++\par
\par
Type conversion means converting one data type into another data type.\par
\par
There are two types of type conversion in C++:\par
\par
Implicit Type Conversion\par
Explicit Type Conversion\par
1. Implicit Type Conversion\par
\par
Implicit conversion is performed automatically by the compiler without programmer intervention.\par
\par
Also called automatic type conversion.\par
Usually converts smaller data types into larger data types to avoid data loss.\par
Example\par
#include <iostream>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    int a = 10;\par
    float b = a;   // int automatically converted to float\par
\par
    cout << b;\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Output\par
10\par
Features\par
Done automatically by the compiler\par
No special syntax required\par
Safe when converting smaller types to larger types\par
2. Explicit Type Conversion\par
\par
Explicit conversion is performed manually by the programmer using casting operators.\par
\par
Also called type casting.\par
Used when the programmer wants to force conversion.\par
Example\par
#include <iostream>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    float x = 5.8;\par
\par
    int y = (int)x;   // explicit conversion\par
\par
    cout << y;\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Output\par
5\par
Features\par
Done manually by the programmer\par
Uses casting operators like (int), (float)\par
May cause data loss\par
Key Differences\par
Implicit Conversion\tab Explicit Conversion\par
Done automatically by compiler\tab Done manually by programmer\par
No casting syntax needed\tab Requires type casting\par
Safer conversion\tab May lose data\par
Converts compatible types automatically\tab Forces conversion between types.\par
\par
\highlight2\fs36 7.  What are the different types of operators in C++? Provide examples of \par
\par
\highlight0\fs22 1. Arithmetic Operators\par
\par
Used to perform mathematical operations.\par
\par
Operator\tab Meaning\tab Example\par
+\tab Addition\tab a + b\par
-\tab Subtraction\tab a - b\par
*\tab Multiplication\tab a * b\par
/\tab Division\tab a / b\par
%\tab Modulus\tab a % b\par
Example\par
int a = 10, b = 5;\par
cout << a + b;\par
2. Relational Operators\par
\par
Used to compare two values.\par
\par
Operator\tab Meaning\par
==\tab Equal to\par
!=\tab Not equal to\par
>\tab Greater than\par
<\tab Less than\par
>=\tab Greater than or equal to\par
<=\tab Less than or equal to\par
Example\par
cout << (10 > 5);\par
3. Logical Operators\par
\par
Used to combine conditions.\par
\par
Operator\tab Meaning\par
&&\tab Logical AND\par
`\tab\par
!\tab Logical NOT\par
Example\par
cout << (5 > 2 && 10 > 3);\par
4. Assignment Operators\par
\par
Used to assign values to variables.\par
\par
Operator\tab Example\par
=\tab a = 5\par
+=\tab a += 2\par
-=\tab a -= 2\par
*=\tab a *= 2\par
/=\tab a /= 2\par
Example\par
int a = 5;\par
a += 3;\par
5. Increment and Decrement Operators\par
\par
Used to increase or decrease value by 1.\par
\par
Operator\tab Meaning\par
++\tab Increment\par
--\tab Decrement\par
Example\par
int a = 5;\par
a++;\par
6. Bitwise Operators\par
\par
Used to perform operations on bits.\par
\par
Operator\tab Meaning\par
&\tab Bitwise AND\par
`\tab `\par
^\tab Bitwise XOR\par
~\tab Bitwise NOT\par
<<\tab Left Shift\par
>>\tab Right Shift\par
Example\par
cout << (5 & 3);\par
7. Conditional (Ternary) Operator\par
\par
Used to make decisions in a single statement.\par
\par
Syntax\par
condition ? expression1 : expression2;\par
Example\par
int a = 10, b = 20;\par
cout << (a > b ? a : b);\par
8. Special Operators\par
\par
Some special-purpose operators in C++:\par
\par
Operator\tab Purpose\par
sizeof\tab Returns size of variable\par
&\tab Address operator\par
*\tab Pointer operator\par
Example\par
cout << sizeof(int);\par
\par
\highlight2\fs36 8  . Explain the purpose and use of constants and literals in C++.\par
\highlight0\fs22 Constants and Literals in C++\par
\par
Constants and literals are fixed values used in a C++ program. Their values do not change during program execution.\par
\par
Constants\par
\par
A constant is a named value whose value cannot be changed once assigned.\par
\par
Constants are declared using the const keyword.\par
\par
Syntax\par
const data_type variable_name = value;\par
Example\par
#include <iostream>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    const int MAX = 100;\par
\par
    cout << MAX;\par
\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Purpose of Constants\par
Prevent accidental modification of values\par
Improve readability of the program\par
Make programs easier to maintain\par
Used for fixed values such as PI, tax rates, limits, etc.\par
Literals\par
\par
Literals are fixed values written directly in the program code.\par
\par
Types of Literals in C++\par
Type of Literal\tab Example\par
Integer Literal\tab 10, 25\par
Floating Literal\tab 3.14, 7.5\par
Character Literal\tab 'A', 'b'\par
String Literal\tab "Hello"\par
Boolean Literal\tab true, false\par
Example\par
int age = 18;\par
float marks = 85.5;\par
char grade = 'A';\par
\par
Here:\par
\par
18\par
85.5\par
'A'\par
\par
are literals.\par
\par
Difference Between Constants and Literals\par
Constants\tab Literals\par
Have names\tab Written directly in code\par
Declared using const\tab No declaration needed\par
Cannot be modified\tab Represent fixed values\par
Example: const int x = 5;\tab Example: 5.\par
\par
\highlight2\fs36 9. Difference Between for, while, and do-while Loops in C++\par
\highlight0\fs22\par
Loops are used to execute a block of code repeatedly in C++.\par
\par
The three main loops are:\par
\par
for loop\par
while loop\par
do-while loop\par
1. for Loop\par
\par
The for loop is used when the number of iterations is known in advance.\par
\par
Syntax\par
for(initialization; condition; update) \{\par
    // code\par
\}\par
Example\par
for(int i = 1; i <= 5; i++) \{\par
    cout << i;\par
\}\par
\par
\highlight2\fs36 10. How are break and continue statements used in loops? Provide \par
\highlight0\fs22 1. break Statement\par
\par
The break statement is used to immediately terminate a loop or switch statement.\par
\par
When break is encountered, control moves outside the loop.\par
\par
Example\par
#include <iostream>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    for(int i = 1; i <= 5; i++) \{\par
        if(i == 3) \{\par
            break;\par
        \}\par
        cout << i << " ";\par
    \}\par
\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Output\par
1 2\par
Explanation\par
The loop stops when i becomes 3.\par
Remaining iterations are not executed.\par
2. continue Statement\par
\par
The continue statement skips the current iteration and moves to the next iteration of the loop.\par
\par
Example\par
#include <iostream>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    for(int i = 1; i <= 5; i++) \{\par
        if(i == 3) \{\par
            continue;\par
        \}\par
        cout << i << " ";\par
    \}\par
\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Output\par
1 2 4 5\par
Explanation\par
When i becomes 3, that iteration is skipped.\par
The loop continues with the next value.\par
Difference Between break and continue\par
break\tab continue\par
Terminates the loop completely\tab Skips only the current iteration\par
Control exits the loop\tab Control goes to next iteration\par
Used to stop looping\tab Used to skip specific conditions.\par
\highlight2\fs36 11. Explain nested control structures with an example.\par
\highlight0\fs22 Nested Control Structures in C++\par
\par
A nested control structure means placing one control structure inside another control structure.\par
\par
Examples:\par
\par
An if statement inside another if\par
A loop inside another loop\par
An if statement inside a loop\par
\par
Nested structures are used when multiple conditions or repeated operations are required.\par
\par
Nested if Statement Example\par
#include <iostream>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    int age = 20;\par
    int marks = 75;\par
\par
    if(age >= 18) \{\par
        if(marks >= 50) \{\par
            cout << "Eligible";\par
        \}\par
    \}\par
\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Explanation\par
The first if checks the age.\par
The second if inside it checks the marks.\par
Output is displayed only if both conditions are true.\par
Nested Loop Example\par
#include <iostream>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    for(int i = 1; i <= 3; i++) \{\par
        for(int j = 1; j <= 2; j++) \{\par
            cout << i << " " << j << endl;\par
        \}\par
    \}\par
\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Output\par
1 1\par
1 2\par
2 1\par
2 2\par
3 1\par
3 2\par
Explanation\par
The outer loop runs 3 times.\par
For each iteration of the outer loop, the inner loop runs 2 times.\par
Uses of Nested Control Structures\par
Pattern printing\par
Matrix operations\par
Multi-condition checking\par
Menu-driven programs\par
\highlight2\fs36 12. What is a function in C++? Explain the concept of function declaration, definition, and calling.\par
\par
\highlight0\fs22 Function in C++\par
\par
A function is a block of code that performs a specific task. Functions help divide a program into smaller and manageable parts, making the code reusable and easier to understand.\par
\par
Concepts of Functions in C++\par
\par
There are three important parts of a function:\par
\par
Function Declaration\par
Function Definition\par
Function Calling\par
1. Function Declaration\par
\par
A function declaration tells the compiler about:\par
\par
function name\par
return type\par
parameters\par
\par
It is also known as a function prototype.\par
\par
Syntax\par
return_type function_name(parameters);\par
Example\par
int add(int, int);\par
\par
This statement informs the compiler that a function named add exists and returns an integer value.\par
\par
2. Function Definition\par
\par
The function definition contains the actual code that performs the task.\par
\par
Syntax\par
return_type function_name(parameters) \{\par
    // function body\par
\}\par
Example\par
int add(int a, int b) \{\par
    return a + b;\par
\}\par
\par
Here:\par
\par
a and b are parameters\par
return a + b; returns the sum\par
3. Function Calling\par
\par
Function calling means executing the function using its name.\par
\par
Example\par
int result = add(5, 3);\par
\par
Here:\par
\par
5 and 3 are arguments passed to the function\par
The function executes and returns the result\par
Complete Program Example\par
#include <iostream>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
// Function Declaration\par
int add(int, int);\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    // Function Calling\par
    int result = add(5, 3);\par
\par
    cout << "Sum = " << result;\par
\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
\par
// Function Definition\par
int add(int a, int b) \{\par
    return a + b;\par
\}\par
Output\par
Sum = 8\par
Advantages of Functions\par
Reusability of code\par
Reduces repetition\par
Easier debugging\par
Improves readability and maintenance.\par
\par
\highlight2\fs32 13.  Explain recursion in C++ with an example.\par
\highlight0\fs22 Scope of Variables in C++\par
\par
The scope of a variable refers to the region of a program where the variable can be accessed or used.\par
\par
In C++, variables mainly have two types of scope:\par
\par
Local Scope\par
Global Scope\par
1. Local Scope\par
\par
A variable declared inside a function or block is called a local variable.\par
\par
It can be accessed only within that function or block.\par
It is created when the function starts and destroyed when the function ends.\par
Example\par
#include <iostream>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
void display() \{\par
    int x = 10;   // local variable\par
    cout << x;\par
\}\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    display();\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Explanation\par
x is local to the display() function.\par
It cannot be accessed outside the function.\par
2. Global Scope\par
\par
A variable declared outside all functions is called a global variable.\par
\par
It can be accessed from any function in the program.\par
It remains in memory throughout the program execution.\par
Example\par
#include <iostream>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int x = 20;   // global variable\par
\par
void display() \{\par
    cout << x;\par
\}\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    display();\par
    cout << x;\par
\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Explanation\par
x is accessible inside both display() and main() functions.\par
Difference Between Local and Global Scope\par
Local Scope\tab Global Scope\par
Declared inside a function/block\tab Declared outside all functions\par
Accessible only within that block\tab Accessible throughout the program\par
Exists for a limited time\tab Exists during entire program execution\par
More secure\tab Less secure due to wider access.\par
\highlight2\fs40 14.  What are function prototypes in C++? Why are they used?\par
\highlight0\fs22 Function Prototypes in C++\par
\par
A function prototype is a declaration of a function that tells the compiler:\par
\par
the function name\par
return type\par
number and type of parameters\par
\par
It informs the compiler about the function before its actual definition.\par
\par
Syntax of Function Prototype\par
return_type function_name(parameter_list);\par
\cf3\highlight4\fs52 5. Arrays and Strings\par
\par
\cf4\highlight2\fs36 15 . Explain string handling in C++ with examples. \par
\par
\highlight0\fs22 String Handling in C++\par
\par
A string in C++ is a sequence of characters used to store text such as names, sentences, or messages.\par
\par
C++ provides two ways to handle strings:\par
\par
Character arrays (char)\par
string class from the standard library\par
\par
The string class is easier and more commonly used.\par
\par
To use strings, include the header file:\par
\par
#include <string>\par
Declaring and Initializing Strings\par
Example\par
#include <iostream>\par
#include <string>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    string name = "John";\par
\par
    cout << name;\par
\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Common String Operations\par
1. Input and Output of Strings\par
Example\par
#include <iostream>\par
#include <string>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    string name;\par
\par
    cin >> name;\par
\par
    cout << name;\par
\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
2. Concatenation of Strings\par
\par
Strings can be joined using the + operator.\par
\par
Example\par
string first = "Hello";\par
string second = "World";\par
\par
string result = first + " " + second;\par
3. Finding String Length\par
\par
The length() function returns the number of characters.\par
\par
Example\par
string text = "Programming";\par
\par
cout << text.length();\par
4. Accessing Characters\par
\par
Characters can be accessed using index numbers.\par
\par
Example\par
string name = "Cplusplus";\par
\par
cout << name[0];\par
Output\par
C\par
5. Comparing Strings\par
Example\par
string a = "Apple";\par
string b = "Apple";\par
\par
if(a == b) \{\par
    cout << "Equal";\par
\}\par
6. Using getline()\par
\par
getline() is used to read full sentences including spaces.\par
\par
Example\par
string sentence;\par
\par
getline(cin, sentence);\par
Example Program\par
#include <iostream>\par
#include <string>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    string name = "Alice";\par
\par
    cout << "Name: " << name << endl;\par
    cout << "Length: " << name.length();\par
\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Output\par
Name: Alice\par
Length: 5\par
\par
\highlight2\fs36 16.How are arrays initialized 3. How are arrays initialized in C++? Provide examples of both 1D and 2D arrays.\par
\par
\highlight0\fs22 Array Initialization in C++\par
\par
Array initialization means assigning values to array elements at the time of declaration.\par
\par
Arrays can be initialized in different ways in C++.\par
\par
1D (One-Dimensional) Array Initialization\par
\par
A one-dimensional array stores elements in a single row.\par
\par
Syntax\par
data_type array_name[size] = \{values\};\par
Example\par
#include <iostream>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    int numbers[5] = \{10, 20, 30, 40, 50\};\par
\par
    for(int i = 0; i < 5; i++) \{\par
        cout << numbers[i] << " ";\par
    \}\par
\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Output\par
10 20 30 40 50\par
Partial Initialization of 1D Array\par
\par
If fewer values are provided, remaining elements become 0.\par
\par
Example\par
int arr[5] = \{1, 2\};\par
\par
Result:\par
\par
1 2 0 0 0\par
2D (Two-Dimensional) Array Initialization\par
\par
A two-dimensional array stores data in rows and columns like a matrix.\par
\par
Syntax\par
data_type array_name[rows][columns] = \{\par
    \{values\},\par
    \{values\}\par
\};\par
Example\par
#include <iostream>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    int matrix[2][3] = \{\par
        \{1, 2, 3\},\par
        \{4, 5, 6\}\par
    \};\par
\par
    for(int i = 0; i < 2; i++) \{\par
        for(int j = 0; j < 3; j++) \{\par
            cout << matrix[i][j] << " ";\par
        \}\par
    \}\par
\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Output\par
1 2 3 4 5 6\par
Difference Between 1D and 2D Array Initialization\par
1D Array\tab 2D Array\par
Uses one index\tab Uses two indices\par
Stores data in linear form\tab Stores data in table form\par
Example: int a[5]=\{1,2,3\};\tab Example: int a[2][2]=\{\{1,2\},\{3,4\}\};\line\par
\highlight1\fs32 17. Explain string operations and functions in C++.\par
\highlight0\fs22 String Operations and Functions in C++\par
\par
In C++, strings are used to store and manipulate text.\par
The string class provides many built-in functions and operations for handling strings easily.\par
\par
To use strings, include:\par
\par
#include <string>\par
Common String Operations in C++\par
1. String Input and Output\par
Example\par
#include <iostream>\par
#include <string>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    string name;\par
\par
    cin >> name;\par
\par
    cout << name;\par
\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
2. String Concatenation\par
\par
Concatenation means joining two strings using the + operator.\par
\par
Example\par
string first = "Hello";\par
string second = "World";\par
\par
string result = first + " " + second;\par
\par
cout << result;\par
Output\par
Hello World\par
3. Finding Length of String\par
\par
The length() or size() function returns the number of characters.\par
\par
Example\par
string text = "Programming";\par
\par
cout << text.length();\par
Output\par
11\par
4. Accessing Characters\par
\par
Characters are accessed using index numbers.\par
\par
Example\par
string name = "Computer";\par
\par
cout << name[0];\par
Output\par
C\par
5. Comparing Strings\par
\par
Strings can be compared using ==.\par
\par
Example\par
string a = "Apple";\par
string b = "Apple";\par
\par
if(a == b) \{\par
    cout << "Equal";\par
\}\par
6. Using getline()\par
\par
getline() reads an entire line including spaces.\par
\par
Example\par
string sentence;\par
\par
getline(cin, sentence);\par
7. Substring Operation\par
\par
The substr() function extracts part of a string.\par
\par
Example\par
string text = "Programming";\par
\par
cout << text.substr(0, 4);\par
Output\par
Prog\par
8. String Append\par
\par
The append() function adds text to a string.\par
\par
Example\par
string s = "Hello";\par
\par
s.append(" World");\par
\par
cout << s;\par
9. String Clear\par
\par
The clear() function removes all characters.\par
\par
Example\par
string s = "Text";\par
\par
s.clear();\par
Common String Functions\par
Function\tab Purpose\par
length()\tab Returns string length\par
size()\tab Returns string size\par
append()\tab Adds text\par
substr()\tab Extracts substring\par
clear()\tab Removes all characters\par
empty()\tab Checks if string is empty\par
Example Program\par
#include <iostream>\par
#include <string>\par
using namespace std;\par
\par
int main() \{\par
    string name = "Alice";\par
\par
    cout << "Length: " << name.length() << endl;\par
\par
    string greeting = "Hello " + name;\par
\par
    cout << greeting;\par
\par
    return 0;\par
\}\par
Output\par
Length: 5\par
Hello Alice\par
\cf3\highlight4\fs40 6. Introduction to Object-Oriented Programming\par
\par
\cf4\highlight2\fs36 18.  Explain the key concepts of Object-Oriented Programming (OOP).\par
\highlight0\fs22 Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) is a programming approach based on objects and classes.\par
It helps organize programs in a modular, secure, and reusable way.\par
\par
The main concepts of OOP are:\par
\par
Class\par
Object\par
Encapsulation\par
Abstraction\par
Inheritance\par
Polymorphism\cf0\par
\highlight2\fs36 19. What are classes and objectsin C++? Provide an example.\par
\highlight0\fs22 Classes and Objects in C++\par
Class\par
\par
A class is a user-defined data type that acts as a blueprint for creating objects.\par
It contains:\par
\par
Data members (variables)\par
Member functions (functions)\par
\par
A class defines the properties and behaviors of an object.\par
\highlight2\fs40 20.  What isinheritance in C++? Explain with an example.\par
\highlight0\fs22 Inheritance in C++\par
\par
Inheritance is an important concept of Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) in which one class acquires the properties and behaviors of another class.\par
\par
The existing class is called the base class or parent class.\par
The new class is called the derived class or child class.\par
\par
Inheritance promotes:\par
\par
Code reusability\par
Easy maintenance\par
Hierarchical classification\par
\highlight2\fs32 21.  What is encapsulation in C++? How isit achieved in classes?\par
\highlight0\fs22 Encapsulation in C++\par
\par
Encapsulation is an important concept of Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) that means wrapping data and functions together into a single unit, called a class.\par
\par
It also restricts direct access to data to protect it from unauthorized modification.\par
\par
Encapsulation helps in:\par
\par
Data hiding\par
Security\par
Better control over data\highlight2\fs36\par
}
 